---
title: Practice and Performance are Opposites
publishDate: 6/14/2024
---

# Practice and Performance are Opposites

It's the Men's 2022 Australian Open Final. It looks like a changing of the guard is finally
due. 25 year-old Daniil Medvedev is up 2 sets against the legendary Rafael Nadal. With this
win Daniil will cement the next generation of young players as grand slam contenders against
the perennial champions, Nadal and Novak Djokovic. In the 3rd set Medvedev hits a flying
down-the-line backhand to go up 0-40 on Rafa's serve. One more point and the 3rd set will
likely be his, and with it the championship. But it was not to be. Medvedev starts to hit
safe, weak shots or unforced errors. He seems to suddenly have no weapons left, and a veteran
like Nadal is able to easily maintain his own quality enough to capitalize on the weak play.
Medvedev would go on to lose the game, the set, and the entire match. Tennis fans rightly
credit the incredible fighting spirit Nadal showed to pull off one of the greatest slam
comebacks ever seen. Nadal had been missing many tournaments the previous year due to injury,
and the Australian Open was arguably his worst slam. It's undoubtedly one of his most
inspirational wins. And yet for fans of the younger generation, it was an all too familiar
result. The past few years had seen slam after slam look promising for the next-gen, only to
fall short to one of the big 3(Nadal, Djokovic, and Federer). Mental weakness was an oft-cited
cause of these results. The big 3 had incredible abilities, but their ability to come alive
and maintain an elite level in the most critical moments seemed to define their edge. The
younger players could show flashes of brilliance, but eventually something wouldn't go their
way and their game would crumble. They might choke just on the edge of victory like Medvedev
had. In fact, after this win 3 of the most promising next-gen players(Medvedev, Zverev, and
Tsitsipas) had all lost a slam final from 2 sets up, needing just one more to win the match<sup
id="footnote-ref-1">[1](#footnote1)</sup>. What separates the greats from the rest? I believe
it's because the greats were those that had the ability to execute and continuously improve,
but also realized one key fact: practice and performance are opposites.

If you've ever tried to improve at any sport or game, you've probably heard the mantra:
"Practice like you play". It's a common saying meant to impart that if you want to play at a
high level, you've got to practice at a high level. Especially in taxing physical sports, the
temptation to take it easy during practice is always there. Coaches want players to push their
abilities and improve during practice, so that temptation must be fought. You simply won't run
a 4:30 mile on the day of the meet if you never push yourself to run that fast during
practice. This is one of those self-evident pieces of advice that is hard to imagine any
reasonable objection to. The problem is that this advice insidiously implants another idea
into the heads of those that follow it. If you practice like you play, then maybe practice IS
play. Maybe you should treat every soccer practice as if it were a match. Do your gameday
preparation every time. Curse your losses and celebrate your wins. Or not... Most people will
be sensible enough to realize that the results of practice don't matter too much. The
important thing is that you brought the intensity of a real game to your practice. Intensity
is great, absolutely. You want to be pushing yourself to do things just outside your ability,
and practice certainly requires just as much focus as performance. There is a critical
difference though that most people never realize. It all comes back to mentality. In practice,
your mentality should be negative, but in performance your mentality should be positive.

The key distinction of mentality comes from what ideal practice and performance fundamentally
are. Ideal practice will be "Deliberate Practice", a term coined by psychologist K. Anders
Ericsson. Deliberate practice should be a focused period where you are consistently trying to
perform a skill just beyond the edge of your current ability. On every attempt you should be
getting quick and clear feedback on whether you achieved your new goal. Once you finally get
it you need to keep pushing to the next level just beyond you. It is incredibly taxing
mentally, meaning it isn't fun. It is and should be quite uncomfortable. Ideal practice is all
about leaving your comfort zone. Ideal performance is instead all about staying squarely in
your comfort zone. You want every action that you need to perform to be so natural that there
is virtually no chance of failure. This is what makes great performance seem so incredible.
The magician who effortlessly pulls off a trick requiring impeccable timing and dexterity
seems like an improbable feat to the audience, yet to the magician himself it is routine. He's
done the trick thousands of times alone, so he's completely comfortable executing it
flawlessly on stage. In tennis a passing shot that hits the corner of the court in tennis
looks superhuman, but the player has drilled that shot for dozens of hours with his coach.
This crucial difference of comfort vs discomfort is one aspect of why practice and performance
are distinct. But the difference goes even deeper than that.

The opposite of Defend Mode is Discover Mode. Just as defend mode is ideal for practice,
discover mode is ideal for performance. Discover mode is opportunity-seeking. Ancestrally this
was useful for foraging for instance. It enabled you to walk through a forest with a wide
focus, scanning for food sources. Discover mode also helped socially, making you friendly and
approachable while on the lookout for potential mates or friendships. Keeping a broad focus
makes you flexible to what your environment throws at you, allowing you to react quickly and
calmly. This is what makes it so useful for performance. You can't know exactly what
challenges a performance will throw at you beforehand. In any direct competitive sport your
opponents are deliberately trying to do things that you won't expect. If they catch you off
guard you don't have time to hyper-focus on your mistake. You have to be able to quickly shrug
it off and focus on the next thing. Novak Djokovic is a master of this. He frequently gets
visibly upset when he misses a shot or gets outplayed, but by the next point he is completely
calm and focused. If he wins a great point after he'll celebrate triumphantly, without any
indication that he had just been frustrated. By keeping himself calm he is able to easily make
the great shots that are routine for him. It's only when you flip to defend mode that the
routine becomes difficult. Complex, fluid motions become rigid and error-prone due to the
stress response. It's no coincidence that Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi's Flow state is
characterized as "fully immersed in a feeling of energized focus, full involvement, and
enjoyment in the process of the activity". Flow state is often used to describe elite
performers. It's obvious that they would be engerized and involved, but the enjoyment is also
critical. Is it any wonder that the new tennis phenom Carlos Alcaraz is noted for how much he
smiles on court?

<div class="footnote" id="footnote1">
    1. These players have been dubbed the "little 3" for reasons like this.<a href="#footnote-ref-1"><sup>[return]</sup></a>
</div>
